Add runtime type introspection section (#3)
wjwwood/rep: rep-2011.rst

Runtime Type Introspection
--------------------------

> The ability to detect type mismatches and obtain the type description in the event of a mismatch in the previous two sections enables the ability to do runtime type introspection.

Reviewer: Technically the ability to detect type mismatches doesn't support runtime type introspection. The feature could be used to parse a message from a bagfile using just the description included with it. That neither uses a version hash nor does it require type description distribution.

It's true that we do want to use those two things in conjunction with runtime type introspection, but technically they are orthogonal. So this isn't wrong, we should just reword it a bit with better qualifying statements.

Author: https://github.com/wjwwood/rep/pull/3/commits/bdfa2cfcd926334b1f28845d91b66867ab9218a6

> Specifically, this feature should allow access to the data and fields in a serialized message buffer when given:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Specifically, this feature should allow access to the data in the fields of a serialized message buffer when given:
```

Or something to that effect, the data and fields aren't really different things, unless you mean the field names/types, which are separate, but if I say "give me the field 'x'", that generally implies the value/data.

> - the raw ``uint8[]`` message buffer

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the serialized message as a ``rmw_serialized_message_t``, a.k.a. a ``rcutils_uint8_array_t``
```

> - the message's type description, from inter-process type description distribution

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the message's type description, e.g. received from the aforementioned type description distribution or from a bag file
```

> - the version and name of the serialization library used to serialize the message

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the serialization format, name and version, which was used to create the serialized message, e.g. ``XCDR2`` for ``Extended CDR encoding version 2``
```

From these inputs, we should be able to access the data as fields in the message buffer through some programmatic interface, including:

- a list of field names
- a list of field types

> - access to the field by name or index as a type

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- access to the field by name or index
```

The "as a type" was strange to me, I was going to suggest "as a value" which sounds more correct to me, but then decided to suggest to remove it all together.

.. code::

            message_buffer ─┐   ┌────────────────────────────┐
                            │   │                            │
       message_description ─┼──►│ Runtime Type Introspection ├───► Introspection Interface
                            │   │                            │
      serialization_format ─┘   └────────────────────────────┘

> Given that the scope of inputs and expected outputs is so limited, this feature should be implemented as a separate package (e.g., ``rcl_serialization``) that can be called independently by any downstream packages that might need runtime type introspection (e.g. ROS, rosbag transport, etc.)

Reviewer: Yeah, this would be really nice, we need to investigate more about how feasible this is. I think it's kind of necessary, since you may not have the required rmw implementations on hand all the time. It would be nice to have something completely independent that is just a library of serialization functions. But at the same time this may require us to do something like make a hard dependency on Fast-CDR (just as an example) which we otherwise would not need to do.

```suggestion
Given that the scope of inputs and expected outputs is so limited, this feature should ideally be implemented as a separate package, e.g. ``rcl_serialization``, that can be called independently by any downstream packages that might need runtime type introspection, e.g. introspection tools, rosbag transport, etc.
```

Furthermore, it is important to note that this feature is distinguished from ROS 2's "dynamic" type support (``rosidl_typesupport_introspection_c``) in that "dynamic" type support generates type support code at compile time that then is not expected to change, whereas this feature aims to support any arbitrary message type descriptions at runtime.

> Crucially, this means that a node will not need access to a message's type description at compile time in order to be able to support it, since it will be able to receive and utilize the type description with this feature, in contrast to "dynamic" type support, which would require it.

Reviewer: I think we need to tighten up our terminology here, let's talk about it off-line.

Requirements
^^^^^^^^^^^^

In order for runtime type introspection to work, message buffers still need to be able to be transmitted and received, as such, this feature is expected to work if and only if:

- the producers (publishers) and consumers (subscribers) of the message are using compatible RMW implementations
- the consumer has access to a compatible version of the serialization library described in the message type description
- the serialization libraries expected to be used with this feature support at least sequential access to message buffer data members with a runtime programmatic interface

> Furthermore, this feature will be implemented as a C library to allow for maximum interoperability with the ROS client libraries (e.g. C++, Python, Rust, etc.)

Reviewer: I think this couples a bit too much with transport. While most of this is true, it's also true that no transport is required. You can read a buffer and description from a bag file and access the contents of the message. No pub/sub involved. Let's rework this with that in mind.

Plugin Interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

As runtime type introspection is expected to work across any arbitrary serialization library, functionality has to be built in to allow for the loading of the necessary serialization libraries required by the message type description.

> Serialization library support in this case will be provided by writing plugins that wrap the serialization libraries that can then plug in dynamically to the runtime type introspection feature using a unified plugin interface. Then, runtime type introspection will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As runtime type introspection is expected to work across any serialization format, the runtime type introspection interface needs to be extensible so that the necessary serialization libraries can be loaded to process the serialized message.
Serialization format support in this case will be provided by writing plugins that wrap the serialization libraries that can then provide the runtime type introspection feature with the needed facilities.
Then, runtime type introspection will:
```

- dynamically load the plugin

These serialization library plugins must wrap functionality to:

- determine suitability for use with a message's reported serialization version and type
- parse the ``.idl`` / ``.msg`` component of the message description into a serialization library usable form
- given that parsed description (which provides type reflection information about the message buffer), deserialize the message buffer using the serialization library

In particular, the step of parsing the ``.idl``  / ``.msg`` file is necessary because there might be serialization library or type support specific steps or considerations (e.g. field re-ordering, endianness) that would not be captured in the ``.idl`` / ``.msg`` file, because they would have been assumed to have been applied during type support.

Dealing with Multiple Applicable Plugins for A Serialization Format
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""""

In the case where there exists multiple applicable plugins for a particular serialization format, the plugin matching should follow this priority order:

- user specified overrides passed to the matching function

> - defaults defined in the plugin matching function, if applicable, otherwise

Reviewer: Mention the use case for this, i.e. connext's CDR library vs Fast-CDR, which should you use if both are available?

Author: https://github.com/wjwwood/rep/pull/3/commits/bdfa2cfcd926334b1f28845d91b66867ab9218a6

- the first suitable plugin in alphanumeric sorting order

Example Plugin Interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Plugin Matching and Loading
"""""""""""""""""""""""""""

The following is an example of how this plugin matching and loading interface could look like, defining new ``rcl`` interfaces; with a plugin wrapping FastCDR v1.0.24 for serialization, with some arbitrary message type `Foo`:

.. code::

    // Suppose FooDescription reports that it uses FastCDR v1.0.24 for its serialization
    rcl_message_description_t FooDescription = node->get_type_description("/foo_endpoint_name");

    rcl_type_introspection_t * introspection_handle;
    introspection_handle->init();  // Locate local plugins here

    // Plugin name: "fastcdr_v1_0_24"
    const char * plugin_name = introspection_handle->match_plugin(FooDescription->get_serialization_format());
    rcl_serialization_plugin_t * plugin = introspection_handle->load_plugin("fastcdr_v1_0_24");

    // If we wanted to force the use of MicroCDR instead

>     introspection_handle->match_plugin(FooDescription->get_serialization_type(), "microcdr");

Reviewer: Let's try using a concrete example, like `/scan` and `sensor_msgs/msg/LaserScan`. (or image or point cloud)

Author: https://github.com/wjwwood/rep/pull/3/commits/bdfa2cfcd926334b1f28845d91b66867ab9218a6

    // rcl_serialization_plugin_t->(*deserialize)
    void deserialize(void *buffer,
                     plugin_internal_description_t *description,
                     rcl_deserialized_message_t *msg)
    {
      FastCdr * cdr = new FastCdr(new FastBuffer((char *)buffer, description->buffer_length));

      msg->message_field_names = new char*[description->num_fields];
      msg->message_types = new char*[description->num_fields];

      for (int i = 0; i < description->num_fields; i++)
      {
        const char * type = description->field_types[i];

        // Primitives
        if (strcmp(type, "bool") == 0)
        {
          bool tmp;
        }
        else if (strcmp(type, "char") == 0)
        {
          char tmp;
        }
        ...

        // TODO:: What to do about nested types? A recursive unpacking call with a different description?

        cdr >> tmp;
        msg->message_fields[description->field_names[i]] = reinterpret_cast<void *>(tmp);

        msg->message_field_names[i] = description->field_names[i];
        msg->message_types[i] = description->field_types[i];
      }
      msg->message_field_count = description->num_fields;

>     }

Reviewer: Based on off-line discussion, let's drop this section.

Author: https://github.com/wjwwood/rep/pull/3/commits/bdfa2cfcd926334b1f28845d91b66867ab9218a6

.. code::

    struct rcl_deserialized_field_t {
        void * value;
        char * type;
    }

    struct rcl_deserialized_message_t {
        int message_field_count;
        const char** message_field_names;
        const char** message_types;

        // Some dynamically allocated key->value associative map type storing void * field values
        rcl_associative_array message_fields;

        // Function pointers
        rcl_deserialized_field_t * (*get_field_by_index)(int index);
    };

Now, for a given message description `Foo.msg`:

.. code::

    // Foo.msg
    bool bool_field
    char char_field
    float32 float_field

The corresponding `rcl_deserialized_message_t` can be queried accordingly:

.. code::

    rcl_deserialized_message_t * foo_msg;
    foo_msg->message_field_names[0];  // "bool_field"
    foo_msg->message_types[0];  // "bool"

    // Get the field
    if (strcmp("bool", foo_msg->get_field_by_index(0)->type) == 0)
    {
        *((bool*)foo_msg->get_field_by_index(0)->value);

>     }

Reviewer: All this needs to be updated with the nested types work.

Author: Will be updated in the next PR
